Rebrand, and proof-read edits (#4)
inference-labs-inc/zk-vin-whitepaper: zklayer-whitepaper.tex

Artificial Intelligence (AI) stands at the forefront of modern technological advancements, revolutionizing industries and reshaping the way we interact with technology. With its ability to mimic human cognitive functions, AI enables machines to learn from data, adapt to new inputs, and perform tasks that traditionally required human intelligence. From personalized recommendation systems to autonomous vehicles, AI applications permeate various aspects of our daily lives, offering solutions to complex problems and unlocking new possibilities for innovation.

> Machine Learning (ML), a subset of AI, focuses on the development of algorithms that allow computers to learn from and make predictions or decisions based on data. Through the iterative process of training on large datasets, ML algorithms can recognize patterns, extract insights, and improve their performance over time without being explicitly programmed. This capability is driving advancements in fields such as healthcare, finance, and cybersecurity, where ML techniques are being utilized to enhance diagnosic accuracy, optimize financial trading strategies, and detect anomalies in network traffic, among other applications. ML's versatility and effectiveness in handling large volumes of data make it a pivotal component of the AI landscape, propelling the evolution of intelligent systems and fueling the growth of data-driven decision-making across industries.

Reviewer: diganosic should be diagnostic
```suggestion
Machine Learning (ML), a subset of AI, focuses on the development of algorithms that allow computers to learn from and make predictions or decisions based on data. Through the iterative process of training on large datasets, ML algorithms can recognize patterns, extract insights, and improve their performance over time without being explicitly programmed. This capability is driving advancements in fields such as healthcare, finance, and cybersecurity, where ML techniques are being utilized to enhance diagnosic accuracy, optimize financial trading strategies, and detect anomalies in network traffic, among other applications. ML's versatility and effectiveness in handling large volumes of data make it a pivotal component of the AI landscape, propelling the evolution of intelligent systems and fueling the growth of data-driven decision-making across industries.
```
```suggestion
Machine Learning (ML), a subset of AI, focuses on the development of algorithms that allow computers to learn from and make predictions or decisions based on data. Through the iterative process of training on large datasets, ML algorithms can recognize patterns, extract insights, and improve their performance over time without being explicitly programmed. This capability is driving advancements in fields such as healthcare, finance, and cybersecurity, where ML techniques are being utilized to enhance diagnostic accuracy, optimize financial trading strategies, and detect anomalies in network traffic, among other applications. ML's versatility and effectiveness in handling large volumes of data make it a pivotal component of the AI landscape, propelling the evolution of intelligent systems and fueling the growth of data-driven decision-making across industries.
```

Author: fixed

Similarly, Web3 introduces its own set of challenges, particularly concerning privacy and data protection. Decentralized networks aim to empower users with greater control over their data and digital identities. However, achieving privacy in a transparent and auditable blockchain environment presents inherent tensions. While cryptographic techniques such as zero-knowledge proofs offer promising solutions, they also introduce complexities in terms of implementation, scalability, and usability. Additionally, navigating regulatory frameworks and compliance requirements in decentralized ecosystems poses challenges in ensuring legal and regulatory compliance while preserving user privacy and data sovereignty.

> Despite the individual challenges posed by AI and Web3, the combination of the two further compounds the complexity. Integrating AI algorithms into decentralized networks requires addressing the unique challenges of both domains while ensuring compatibility, security, and usability. The interoperability between AI and Web3 technologies necessitates novel approaches to data privacy, algorithmic transparency, and governance mechanisms. As such, achieving a seamless and effective fusion of AI and Web3 requires a concerted efforts to overcome technical, regulatory, and societal challenges, making it a highly intricate and demanding undertaking.

Reviewer 2: Small typo here

```suggestion
Despite the individual challenges posed by AI and Web3, the combination of the two further compounds the complexity. Integrating AI algorithms into decentralized networks requires addressing the unique challenges of both domains while ensuring compatibility, security, and usability. The interoperability between AI and Web3 technologies necessitates novel approaches to data privacy, algorithmic transparency, and governance mechanisms. As such, achieving a seamless and effective fusion of AI and Web3 requires a concerted effort to overcome technical, regulatory, and societal challenges, making it a highly intricate and demanding undertaking.
```

Author: fixed

\subsubsection{Smart Contract}

> Smart contracts, a pivotal innovation enabled by blockchain technology, are self-executing contracts with the terms of the agreement directly written into code. Operating on decentralized networks like Ethereum, smart contracts automate and enforce the execution of contractual agreements without the need for intermediaries, thereby reducing reliance on traditional legal processes and enhancing efficiency. These programmable contracts can execute predefined actions automatically when specific conditions are met, facilitating a wide range the tokenization of assets, DeFi, supply chain management, and more. By leveraging cryptographic security and decentralization, smart contracts ensure trust and immutability, as transactions are recorded on a tamper-proof blockchain ledger. This transformative technology has the potential to revolutionize the way agreements are made and executed, offering increased transparency, speed, and reliability in various industries and sectors.

Reviewer: The following sentence must be reworded:

These programmable contracts can execute predefined actions automatically when specific conditions are met, facilitating a wide range the tokenization of assets, DeFi, supply chain management, and more.

Author: fixed

> Smart contracts, a pivotal innovation enabled by blockchain technology, are self-executing contracts with the terms of the agreement directly written into code. Operating on decentralized networks like Ethereum, smart contracts automate and enforce the execution of contractual agreements without the need for intermediaries, thereby reducing reliance on traditional legal processes and enhancing efficiency. These programmable contracts can execute predefined actions automatically when specific conditions are met, facilitating a wide range the tokenization of assets, DeFi, supply chain management, and more. By leveraging cryptographic security and decentralization, smart contracts ensure trust and immutability, as transactions are recorded on a tamper-proof blockchain ledger. This transformative technology has the potential to revolutionize the way agreements are made and executed, offering increased transparency, speed, and reliability in various industries and sectors.

Reviewer 3: Something's not right

> facilitating a wide range the tokenization of assets, DeFi, supply chain management, and more.

Blockchain interconnection, as a critical component for designing ZKLayer, refers to the capability of various blockchain networks or platforms to communicate and interact seamlessly. This interoperability facilitates the smooth flow of data, assets, or transactions between disparate blockchain systems, fostering cross-chain functionality and collaboration. There are multiple approaches to achieving blockchain interconnection, including cross-chain communication protocols, atomic swaps, wrapped tokens, sidechains, and oracles. Such interconnection is pivotal for unlocking the complete potential of blockchain technology, enabling collaboration, scalability, and interoperability across diverse blockchain networks and platforms.

\subsubsection{ZKP}

Zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) represents a breakthrough cryptographic technique that enables one party to prove the validity of a statement to another party without revealing any additional information beyond the validity itself. This powerful concept allows for the verification of data or computations while maintaining the privacy and confidentiality of sensitive information.

\subsubsection{ZKML}

> In the realm of cutting-edge cryptographic technologies, Zero-Knowledge Machine Learning (ZKML) emerges as a game-changer by combining the power of zero-knowledge proofs with machine learning algorithms. Not all challenges in AI and ML but some of them could be addressed through ZKP.

Reviewer 2: Idea for a reword of this last sentence

```suggestion
In the realm of cutting-edge cryptographic technologies, Zero-Knowledge Machine Learning (ZKML) emerges as a game-changer by combining the power of zero-knowledge proofs with machine learning algorithms. Though ZKML cannot address all challenges in AI and ML, it provides a necessary layer of security and authenticity not found in today's AI and ML solutions.
```

Author: Reworded in a consolidated commit

A naïve solution would involve the model developer sharing the model with the customers, who would then run the model locally to ensure its integrity. However, this approach is not practical due to the large size of models and the limited computational resources available to customers. As an alternative, Ghodsi et al.~\cite{Ghodsi2017SafetyNetsVE} proposed, for the first time, the use of ZKP to design a solution where the model developer, or a third party like a cloud service, runs the model but generates a proof using ZKP for the customer to ensure that the genuine model has been executed.

> While Ghodsi's solution offers benefits, it necessitates the sharing of the model with customers. However, in certain scenarios, model developers may be reluctant to share their models due to concerns about protecting intellectual property. Consequently, in addition to ensuring the integrity of the model, preserving the privacy of the model becomes another significant concern. Thus, the overarching question arises: How can model developers assure customers that the model has been genuinely executed (ensuring the integrity of inference) without divulging any information about the model itself (preserving model privacy)? To address this new complicated problem, Lee et al.~\cite{Lee2020vCNNVC} proposed a ZKP-based solution that aims to addresse both concerns. Subsequently, other researchers have proposed a more efficient ZKP-based solution to address these two concerns~\cite{Liu2021zkCNNZK},~\cite{Feng2021ZENAO},~\cite{Ju2021EfficientSP}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While Ghodsi's solution offers benefits, it necessitates the sharing of the model with customers. However, in certain scenarios, model developers may be reluctant to share their models due to concerns about protecting intellectual property. Consequently, in addition to ensuring the integrity of the model, preserving the privacy of the model becomes another significant concern. Thus, the overarching question arises: How can model developers assure customers that the model has been genuinely executed (ensuring the integrity of inference) without divulging any information about the model itself (preserving model privacy)? To address this new complicated problem, Lee et al.~\cite{Lee2020vCNNVC} proposed a ZKP-based solution that aims to address both concerns. Subsequently, other researchers have proposed a more efficient ZKP-based solution to address these two concerns~\cite{Liu2021zkCNNZK},~\cite{Feng2021ZENAO},~\cite{Ju2021EfficientSP}.
```

Author: fixed

> While Ghodsi's solution offers benefits, it necessitates the sharing of the model with customers. However, in certain scenarios, model developers may be reluctant to share their models due to concerns about protecting intellectual property. Consequently, in addition to ensuring the integrity of the model, preserving the privacy of the model becomes another significant concern. Thus, the overarching question arises: How can model developers assure customers that the model has been genuinely executed (ensuring the integrity of inference) without divulging any information about the model itself (preserving model privacy)? To address this new complicated problem, Lee et al.~\cite{Lee2020vCNNVC} proposed a ZKP-based solution that aims to addresse both concerns. Subsequently, other researchers have proposed a more efficient ZKP-based solution to address these two concerns~\cite{Liu2021zkCNNZK},~\cite{Feng2021ZENAO},~\cite{Ju2021EfficientSP}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While Ghodsi's solution offers benefits, it necessitates the sharing of the model with customers. However, in certain scenarios, model developers may be reluctant to share their models due to concerns about protecting intellectual property. Consequently, in addition to ensuring the integrity of the model, preserving the privacy of the model becomes another significant concern. Thus, the overarching question arises: How can model developers assure customers that the model has been genuinely executed (ensuring the integrity of inference) without divulging any information about the model itself (preserving model privacy)? To address this new complicated problem, Lee et al.~\cite{Lee2020vCNNVC} proposed a ZKP-based solution that aims to address both concerns. Subsequently, other researchers have proposed a more efficient ZKP-based solution to address these two concerns~\cite{Liu2021zkCNNZK},~\cite{Feng2021ZENAO},~\cite{Ju2021EfficientSP}.
```

Reviewer 3: Although I don't particularly like the wording of

> To address this new complicated problem, Lee et al... proposed a ... solution that aims to address both concerns.

"To address ... solution that aims to address"

Author: fixed

For consumers of AI predictions, ZKLayer offers an additional layer of assurance by eliminating trust assumptions. They confidently rely on the network to validate that the inputs are processed using the correct and intended AI model, with a cryptographic guarantee of faithful execution.  As a result, consumers of AI services benefit from a transparent, trust-minimized environment where AI predictions are verified, reducing the need for blind trust in the operators' execution.

\subsection{Technical Architecture}

> To address current blockchain limitations and challenges of running on-chain Neural Networks, ZKLayer is designed to serve as a conduit between off-chain and on-chain architectures. Taking a forward-looking approach, the ZKLayer architecture is inherently modular, a design philosophy that allows each component of the system to be individually updated or replaced.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To address current blockchain limitations and challenges of running on-chain Neural Networks, ZKLayer is designed to serve as a conduit between off-chain and on-chain architectures. Taking a forward-looking approach, the ZKLayer architecture is inherently modular, a design philosophy for each component of the system to be individually updated or replaced.
```

\subsection{Persistent Storage}

Due to the considerable size of input and outputs from AI models, external persistent storage is required. Depending on the ultimate end use case of the output, storage within ZKLayer may not be required. An example is an NFT image generated with a diffusion model. The hash of the image can be verified and stored on-chain with the image being stored on Arweave~\cite{Arweave} or other decentralized storage networks.

\subsection{Aggregation Circuits}

> As the complexity of a model increases, so does the size of its associated zk-circuit which results in larger proofs. To manage this, aggregation circuits are utilized to amalgamate multiple proofs into a singular, more concise proof that can be submitted on-chain, along with the corresponding output data. This technique also permits the batching of related inferences, enhancing efficiency and reducing the on-chain data storage footprint.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As the complexity of a model increases, so does the size of its associated zk-circuit which results in larger proofs. To manage this, aggregation circuits are utilized to amalgamate multiple proofs into a singular concise proof submitted on-chain, along with the corresponding output data. This technique also permits the batching of related inferences, enhancing efficiency and reducing the on-chain data storage footprint.
```

    \label{fig:Fig 3}
\end{figure}

The network implements sets of blocks, called epochs, in which a registered node must be available. Nodes that register in the current epoch are activated during the following epoch. Model nodes commit compute units per unit of time to the network. Since the compute units for a workload are known ahead of time the network delegates workloads to fill but not exceed its compute capacity.

> It is the expectation that a model node will complete delegated workloads during a registered epoch. Model nodes that fail to complete work while registered or otherwise shown to be unavailable will face a penalty.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It is the expectation that a model node will complete delegated workloads during a registered epoch. Model nodes which fail to complete work while registered or otherwise shown to be unavailable will face a penalty.
```

\subsection{Model Vetting}

As ZKLayer will be an open permission-less network, no party (or even Inference Labs) can decide which models should or shouldn’t be available on the network. Instead an economic system determines how “good” a model is. This is crucial to retain an open and fair censorship free network.

> Verified backtesting is published by the model creator and made available to the public. Users get a guarantee the model will perform a certain way under set circumstances rather than relying on blind trust in published accuracy, precision and recall values. While the provided examples may not be representative of real-world use cases as it is self-published by the creator, this can be seen as a move in the right direction. Users also submit inferences one at a time, with no upfront commitments or complicated setup to quickly verify the usefulness of the model for their application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Verified backtesting is published by the model creator and made available to the public. Users get a guarantee the model will perform a certain way under set circumstances rather than relying on blind trust in published accuracy, precision and recall values. While the provided examples may not be representative of real-world use cases as it is self-published by the creator, this is clearly a move in the right direction. Users also submit inferences one at a time, with no upfront commitments or complicated setup to quickly verify the usefulness of the model for their application.
```

> Aggregating on-chain historical usage of a model results in a proof of its usefulness. How “good” a model is can be answered by its frequency of use, inference by a diverse set of applications and users, and repeat use of a model by a user. In the same way an open-source software package can be evaluated by the number of other projects that depend on it (and subsequently how “good” those packages are).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Aggregating on-chain historical usage of a model results in a proof of its usefulness. How “good” a model is can be answered by its frequency of use, inference by a diverse set of applications and users, and repeat use of a model by a user. In the same way an open-source software package can be evaluated by the number of other projects which depend on it (and subsequently how “good” those packages are).
```

\begin{enumerate}

    \item 	Firstly a neural network is defined in form of a computational graph using PyTorch or TensorFlow.

    \item	Using training data, the defined model will be trained and the final model will export as an .onnx file.

    \item	Point ezkl to the .onnx and input of the model (as a .json file) to generate a ZK-SNARK circuit which will work as the following figure. From here a nearly 1:1 representation of the model is outlaid in a circuit.

\end{enumerate}

> \section{Remained Challenges and future work}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
\section{Remaining Challenges and future work}
```

\subsection{Security evaluation}

The following provides an overview of the cybersecurity concerns present in the current version of ZKLayer. However, these concerns are not significant enough to render ZKLayer useless. The aim is to offer a comprehensive understanding of the advantages and disadvantages of ZKLayer, providing potential customers with a clearer understanding.

\subsubsection{Reverse Engineering Risk}

One of the most valuable aspects of ZKLayer is the aggregation of inferences. Having a clear picture of how often and by whom models are being utilized is a whole industry on its own; however this may create a new form of IP risk yet to be seen at scale. With a sufficient set of inputs to outputs from a particular model, a sophisticated 3rd party could train a similar or competing model using published data. Similar approaches have been seen by crowdsourcing prompt-to-response datasets from ChatGPT and then fine tuning GPTv2 to achieve surprisingly good results.

\textbf{* IP Replication Risk}

> While not a perfect analogy, one must not assume the process of zk-circuit generation to proving and veriﬁcation keys is strictly one way as it would be with any secure hash function. There may be artifacts in the keys that give hints about the original circuit design and therefore the underlying model used to generate the circuits~\cite{BenSasson2014SuccinctNZ}. While it is likely computationally impractical to reverse this process and regenerate the original model from the keys, the risk still theoretically exists.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While not a perfect analogy, one must not assume the process of zk-circuit generation to proving and veriﬁcation keys is strictly one way as it would be with any secure hash function. There may be artifacts in the keys which give hints about the original circuit design and therefore the underlying model used to generate the circuits~\cite{BenSasson2014SuccinctNZ}. While it is likely computationally impractical to reverse this process and regenerate the original model from the keys, the risk still theoretically exists.
```

\textbf{* Trusted Setup Risk}

> There are a few methods to mitigate this which are in early development. Recently ahead of the Unirep v2 launch, a call to the public was made to assist in a public trusted setup generation process (which Inference Labs proudly participated in) and the tools are open source to repeat this process. This process can be replicated at scale and at the protocol level, which allows nodes on the network to contribute to the process as new models are registered on the network and provide incentives for nodes to participate. This also further increases the security of the setup process and the overall network.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are a few methods to mitigate this which are in early development. Recently ahead of the Unirep v2 launch, a call to the public was made to assist in a public trusted setup generation process (which Inference Labs proudly participated in) and the tools are open source to repeat this process. This process can be replicated at scale and at the protocol level. When new models are registered, nodes contribute to the process and are incentivized for their participation. This also further increases the security of the setup process and the overall network.
```

The concept of homomorphic encryption dates back to the 1970s, with the foundational work of Rivest, Adleman, and Dertouzos on partially homomorphic encryption. Over the years, researchers including Craig Gentry made significant breakthroughs in the development of fully homomorphic encryption, culminating in Gentry’s groundbreaking work in 2009~\cite{Gentry2009FullyHE}. Since then, there has been ongoing research to improve the efficiency and practicality of FHE systems~\cite{Dijk2010FullyHE},~\cite{Brakerski2012LeveledFH},~\cite{Gentry2013HomomorphicEF},~\cite{Cheon2017HomomorphicEF}. Despite much improvement and research in FHE, computational complexity and overhead of the current FHE solutions prevent wide industry adoption of the scheme. However, science is improving daily and ongoing advancements in FHE algorithms and implementations hold the promise of making practical deployments of this technology increasingly feasible, unlocking new possibilities for secure and privacy-preserving data processing in different industries such as AI.

> In addition to concerns regarding complexity and performance, there are other considerations in FHE-based systems, particularly when applied to MLaaS. Similar to the integrity inference concern previously discussed; What if the model developer does not execute the genuine model? This raises the concept of Verifiable Fully Homomorphic Encryption (VFHE). VFHE expands on the capabilities of FHE by allowing parties to verify the accuracy of computations performed on encrypted data without decryption~\cite{Viand2023VerifiableFH},~\cite{Chatel2022VerifiableEF}. This introduces an extra layer of trust and assurance in applications where the integrity and accuracy of computations are crucial. By merging the privacy-preserving attributes of FHE with the privacy-preserving and verifiability of cryptographic proofs (like ZKP), VFHE presents a potent tool for enhancing data security, integrity, and trust across a wide array of applications, spanning from secure outsourcing and MLaaS to decentralized finance and beyond.

Reviewer: I do not believe the "What" after the semicolon should be capitalized.

Author: fixed

> In addition to concerns regarding complexity and performance, there are other considerations in FHE-based systems, particularly when applied to MLaaS. Similar to the integrity inference concern previously discussed; What if the model developer does not execute the genuine model? This raises the concept of Verifiable Fully Homomorphic Encryption (VFHE). VFHE expands on the capabilities of FHE by allowing parties to verify the accuracy of computations performed on encrypted data without decryption~\cite{Viand2023VerifiableFH},~\cite{Chatel2022VerifiableEF}. This introduces an extra layer of trust and assurance in applications where the integrity and accuracy of computations are crucial. By merging the privacy-preserving attributes of FHE with the privacy-preserving and verifiability of cryptographic proofs (like ZKP), VFHE presents a potent tool for enhancing data security, integrity, and trust across a wide array of applications, spanning from secure outsourcing and MLaaS to decentralized finance and beyond.

Reviewer 3: > discussed; What

Either lowercase "what" or period rather than semicolon was meant?

Author: fixed

To address this issue, companies should demonstrate the fairness of their AI models. A naïve solution would be for these companies to publicly disclose their algorithms. However, this approach conflicts with their intellectual property rights. Therefore, ZKML proposes a solution whereby companies can prove that they are using a specific algorithm for all users without revealing any information about their models. Kang et al.~\cite{TensorPlonkMedium}. have provided insights into the ZKML system, which operates using GPU acceleration (GPA). The use of GPA can accelerate the proof generation process by over 1000 times. Consequently, they suggest that Twitter could generate proofs for 1\% of the 500 million tweets per day from its users for approximately \$21,000 per day. Given that this cost represents less than 0.5\% of Twitter's annual infrastructure expenses, it is feasible for Twitter to demonstrate the fairness of its feed AI models.

> In the future, as AI models increasingly handle decision-making and various tasks, responsible AI will become even more critical than it is today. Simultaneously, with a shift towards decentralization, most communications and transactions are expected to occur on Web3. In such an environment, ZKLayer could play a vital role by enabling AI model operators to broadcast proofs of honesty on Web3 without compromising the confidentiality of their model details.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the future, as AI models increasingly handle decision-making and various tasks, responsible AI will become even more critical than it is today. Simultaneously, with a shift towards decentralization, most communications and transactions are expected to occur on Web3. In such an environment, ZKLayer will play a vital role by enabling AI model operators to broadcast proofs of honesty on Web3 without compromising the confidentiality of their model details.
```

\section{Conclusion}

> The Zero-Knowledge Layer - Veriﬁed Inference Network (ZKLayer) presents a comprehensive solution to the challenges of integrating AI and blockchain technology. It provides a decentralized protocol that enables secure, off-chain AI model inferences while preserving intellectual property through zero-knowledge cryptography. This innovative approach not only enhances privacy and security but also ensures the integrity and authenticity of AI models. The ZKLayer architecture is designed to be modular and adaptable, supporting rapid deployment across multiple blockchain ecosystems. This work reﬂects a signiﬁcant step towards realizing a decentralized, secure, and privacy-preserving foundation for AI-enhanced blockchain systems, potentially revolutionizing the way AI operates in the blockchain space and contributing to the broader adoption of web3 technologies.

Reviewer: Should "Verified Inference Network still be here?

Author: removed

As we progress we will maintain a strong focus on upholding these fundamental principles:

\textbf{* Decentralization and Democratization of AI}

> ZKLayer aims to enable the decentralization and democra-tization of AI, aligning with core Web3 values. By facilitating privacy-preserving and veriﬁable AI services on public blockchains, ZKLayer makes advanced AI accessible beyond large tech ﬁrms with proprietary data silos. This expands opportunities for innovation, collaboration, and value creation with AI systems operated transparently on open networks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ZKLayer aims to enable the decentralization and democratization of AI, aligning with core Web3 values. By facilitating privacy-preserving and veriﬁable AI services on public blockchains, ZKLayer makes advanced AI accessible beyond large tech ﬁrms with proprietary data silos. This expands opportunities for innovation, collaboration, and value creation with AI systems operated transparently on open networks.
```

Author: fixed
